You can choose what kind of language
the character will use.
You can use archaic language.
If for example...
you want to show
how people spoke before.
It’s just an approximation.
It’s not entirely true
because you weren’t there at that time.
They can also do
an all-out poetry.
The characters you choose
will also provide
the opportunity for you
to choose how they’ll speak.
If this is realistic,
therefore,
it’s important that the diction
and vocabulary you chose
fits the situation
and where they came from.
If she’s a nurse or doctor,
she talks like this
If she’s a janitor,
she talks like this.
If she’s a shoes saleslady,
That’s for the realistic play,
but it can also be sung.
But the words you choose
add to the character.
Whatever the character says
comes backs to her
and we get to know her more.
through the way she talks,
the words she uses,
how she responds.
All these add up for us
to know the character better.
And because of that
the assignment I’ll give you…
In session three,
I showed you what characteristics
you should give to your characters
based on the story.
You can’t separate it.
For me, I can’t separate the character
from what she’s trying to achieve
or the story she’ll make.
So the first assignment
is to write a character sketch.
Introduce the characters to me.
Include the story she’s going through
and how she’ll face it.
Will she achieve it or not?
In the character sketch,
you can determine what she really wants,
which is called objective.
What's her objective?
And when she achieves it,
the story will end.
Whether she achieves it or not,
if she dies because of it,
the story ends.
Second, put the character
in a situation.
You’ve already seen
her entire sketch.
Let’s put the character in a situation
where we’ll hear her speak.
So she’ll do a monologue
in a given situation,
not just a monologue in front of you
or in front of the audience.
Let’s place her in a situation
based on the story he’ll go through.
So that we’ll hear it.
I’m not saying
you’ll include it in your play.
We just want to hear her
and see what she’ll do
and what her decision will be
in the problem she’s facing.
When you find out what she wants,
one of the most important
qualities you will give
is her occupation
because that will dictate
a big part of one’s identity,
which is why sometimes,
to the point of stereotyping,
sometimes, when you put…
May Cardoso, 24, nurse.
Your character is a nurse.
She entered the stage
wearing hot pants.
It creates a break in expectations.
Normally when you see a nurse,
it’s either with a white cap or scrubs.
Migy Obina, 45, banker.
Wearing a gown.
Recently just won Miss Universe.
Oh, how’s that?
That’s slightly a big leap for you
to prove that he’s really a banker.
Otherwise, if the play is about
being a beauty queen,
she could be a beautician
for all we care
because his being a banker
has nothing to do with it.
Again, we go back to what fits
the story you want to do.
You also, of course, will develop
the diction of your character.
The language that she uses.
Is she quiet like the people you know
that aren’t talkative but when they talk—
Boom!
Her truths are very explosive
Hurtful, but she doesn’t talk often
Or is she so talkative that sometimes
she talks first before she thinks?
And then of course
if you put them together,
your character’s occupation
can figure in with the language.
A lawyer will talk differently
from a doctor
who will talk differently
from a garbage collector,
from a store owner.
She has a stock of words.
One good example would be
the movie "Respeto."
Much of the language used is in FlipTop.
And it’s really focused on the words.
The beauty of the words,
the rhythm of the words.
Those are what can also set
the mood and the style.
Do they speak in verse?
It doesn’t have to be realistic.
But even the choice of words!
Call center agents talk differently
from a witch doctor or entertainment hosts.
Even the English
they use is different.
All of these, the decisions they make,
the language they use,
creates an illusion
of three-dimensionality.
This is where,
not entirely poetry,
but poetic devices come in
that you could use.
For example, when he (Maynard's character)
said he only eats adobo and so on.
It creates a different kind of flavor
in the way the character talks.
It elicits what the character values.
He apparently likes adobo.
Why not sinigang?
Maybe it doesn’t sound right.
Sinigang, different
kinds of sinigang,
so sour!
But adobo, if you’re adobo,
a different kind of adobo…
That’s where the poetry of it comes in.
What words will this character use?
- For the people who speak in verse,
- Is that artistic license or half-half?
- Or is there a way to make it natural?
It's because you are thinking, the way--
Even the way you formed your question,
it’s because you’re thinking realistically
You think that speaking
in verse is unnatural.
Anything you put on stage
is already by itself unnatural.
Why would you put it
on stage if it’s natural?
If you want natural,
you go out there.
That's natural.
Once you heighten a situation,
a life story,
any story,
once you put it on stage,
you take it out of its natural context
by putting it there.
So why not with words?
That’s all there is.
When you start it that way,
and you want that overall effect,
then you have to be consistent.
And then again, if you’re experimental,
you can break it at some point.
At one point, it suddenly
becomes realistic.
In the next scene,
why do they suddenly talk like that?
Maybe you’re trying
to make a statement
that we need to figure out.
It could be like that.
It could be…
You accepted Yoda, right?
Have you watched Star Wars?
The sentence construction is reversed.
Grammar Nazis would go crazy.
It doesn’t have to be
a human being.
Isn’t it annoying when she’s already
wearing an animal mask
but he talks just like a human being?
Isn’t that annoying?
It ruins the illusion.
Why did you make her
wear a rat costume?
You chose a style.
I would like to think you chose that
because you think it’s impactful.
That’s why it’s a musical.
For example, they’re in rhyme.
So whatever style of language you use,
I think it’s important to be true
to the world that you’re creating.
If you make it that way,
the poeticism comes out more.
In this monologue,
put the character you chose
at a point where she needs
to make a decision
based on what she really wants to happen.
It can be first decion-making,
final decision-making,
or middle decision-making.
A character does many decisions
to achieve what she wants.
Just choose one part
where she’ll do a monologue.
Character sketch.
Monologue.
And then let’s see if you’ll create
an interesting character.